---
title: Company Culture or the Status Quo
authors:
    - rickearley
date: "2015-07-13"
categories:
    - Life and Code
tags:
    - company culture
    - equality
    - work life balance
use:
    - posts_tags
    - posts_categories
---

### Culture or Status Quo?
I have been with my current company for just over 2 1/2 years. This might not sound like a long time to most, but for me, I have just past a milestone. My wife jokes around that I have a two year itch when it comes to jobs and is also surprised we have lasted 12 years without me jumping ship. If you look over my job history you can see her point and why 2 1/2 years is something I celebrate. It is not because I get fired ever two years, but I get bored with the job or see no growth in position or knowledge. It can also come from being frustrated by the company culture or status quo. There are companies that have built a culture or are afraid to move from their own status quo unless an idea is suggested by senior employees or by management. This can also be taken as a lack of trust in the ideas of new employees that may have some insight because of the experience they bring from other companies or projects.

### Is it just me?
I know I am not the only one that can jump up on this soap box and shout out examples of how they were frustrated by the culture of a company. Don't get me wrong, I like the company I am currently working for. It's not like my fellow co-workers are bad to work with or that management is too demanding for me. To be honest, it has been a good company and they have treated me right as an employee with a good work balance. They stress that employees should be using their vacations to get away from work and enjoy life. The spend money to improve employees skills at financial freedom by helping with emergency funds and budgeting. So what am I complaining about? Why did I feel the need to write this article at all? The work balance and caring for their employees is only one aspect of the culture a company should have. They should also develop trust for even the newest of employees and have a system in place to evaluate new ideas, even if they could produce change that might not be 100% accepted when they are first mentioned. Have a culture that will embrace these ideas and allow them to be presented to all stake holders in a non-bias way.

### Trust!
When I say trust, it is not in the sense that a employee is not given important projects or that their work is reviewed before it gets implemented. In development it should be encouraged to review everyone's code before deployment to production but that should not be seen as a lack of trust but as a good learning opportunity. Trust, as some would say, has to be earned. You would not just allow a new employee to start pushing code to production servers without a SR Developer having a look at it. The problem I see is how companies determine trust. Example, we have a process that sends user to a 3rd party payment system and then retrieves values sent back to us and stores them for later processing and verification. We noticed that a few critical data points were not being stored and so I spend the better part of a day troubleshooting. I determined that we were not being sent the data points we excepted and sent this information to my manager and copied our SR Developer on it as well. Our manager tends to be the point of contact with 3rd parties when it comes to requests since he is also a developer and can understand the request and takes away some of the back and forth we might have to be involved in. Instead of passing along the request, the SR Developer said it had to be on our side, they have worked with the 3rd party before and so the manager did not send the request to the 3rd party vendor. After 2-3 days the SR Developer accepted that we in fact were not receiving the information and that we needed to request action on their side. Because of what I feel was a lack of trust, we now had wasted 2-3 days to resolve the issue. Ask yourself, what would you have done if you were involved in this process?

### Change is not always bad
Lack of change can be another point of frustration for employees. Each year, our developers and some senior managers get together to talk about that year's projects and what we should be looking forward to in the coming year. We like to call it our Geek Week, and is nice to have the face to face time with everyone since a few of us are remote workers. During this time, as much as it can be done, we are removed from our normal routine to share ideas on all current and future projects. We brainstorm on small issues that we have seen or are having and share what everyone is working on. What I have liked about Geek Weeks is we have been able to come up with some good projects, resolutions to existing problems and have the major stake holders present so that decisions can be made quickly. The downside is we do not seem to follow through with a lot of the ideas that are presented and agreed upon. This can bring about frustration and slowly cause people to not bring up their ideas that could help improve the company. I have been to two Geek Weeks now and have watched as suggestions that really need to be implemented are praised as solid ideas and then left to die on the paper they were written down on. I have been in the IT realm for 16+ years and I understand that not ever idea will work in the current environment or that a business decision has to be made on the return on investment vs the time required to implement the idea, but this is when it should be determines that more work needs to be done on the research of the idea. There should not be an agreement that the idea should be implemented and then have management abandon it. I could be wrong, which would not be the first time and will not be the last. Just to be clear, yes I have watched some of my ideas get caught up in the above situations, but I have alway watched as other people's ideas have met the same fate. I have even spoken to them later and found they felt the same way. What makes this worse is when you see the developers who have been there a few years have their ideas implemented when almost everyone there can see the flaws that would not be in one of the other solutions. Trust!

### Break the mold
Companies need to break away from the Status Quo and implement ways to build a strong culture that does not only benefit those that have been there for a long time, but embrace those that are joining the company. Those employees that have been around the block bring the good and bad from other companies. They can say hey, we tried this solution and it did not work out real well. They can see minor improvements that a fresh pair of eyes can bring to a company. Sometimes it is not the experts or the senior employees that move the company forward, it is that one small idea that can bring about amazing opportunities.
